Introduction
Thorough research and analyses on the theory and history of rock music have not
been published until recently. The reason for this stems from the relatively short
history of rock music as a genre, which does not allow an adequate analytical
perspective on the historical and artistic values of rock. Furthermore, the existing
methodologies used in other areas of musicology cannot be directly applied to
other genres of music. The issue is further complicated because much previous
research has coupled its analysis with non-musical disciplines such as sociology
and other social sciences, business management, economics and aesthetics. With
those aspects being perhaps the most commonly researched, rock encyclopae-
dias and dictionaries have mainly focused on the most successful bands and their
and how many weeks they stayed there. Aesthetic and sociological works on rock
music have tried to illuminate the importance of rock personalities, and their a ppeal
to the listener, by examining both the musical subcultures and the social milieu of
Beat – die sprachlose Opposition1
rebellious group movements” as being associated with 1960s beat music. They
drop-outs and other social non-conformists; some consciously adopting aesthetic
values which had previously been the preserve of the middle and upper classes.
There were also the instances of the beat as a medium of expression that was not
ment is classless.
conclusions about late 1960s rock music:
1. Beat is an unconscious form of protest, an opposition without a clear purpose.
2. Although aggression is beyond the core of the beat itself, rock, however, is
not an amiable expression of art towards the wider society, as it has created

individuals to socialise.
3. Beat is a culture with its own symbolic characteristics including clothing, hair-
styles, make-up, image and social context. All these components can result in
a synaesthetic effect.
jects new ideas onto life and society from its increasing adoption of socio-
political criticism.
Richard Meltzer, in his book The Aesthetics of Rock2, investigates the semantic
meanings in rock compositions though, at the same time, he is aware of the extent
gion and technology.
Meltzer confronts the aesthetics of rock with a comparison of symbolic mean-
studied philosophy at Yale University, was a proponent of performance art and
a student of Allan Kaprow3. He later wrote lyrics for the heavy metal band Blue
Öyster Cult.
As punk or heavy metal4

formance art. Performance art was followed by the expansion into the production
of intermedia compositions, conceptualism and happenings. Fujak, Július: Musical
Correla(c)tivity. Notes on Unconventional Music Aesthetic. Nitra: ILAC Faculty of
Arts, UCP, 2005; Podpera, Rastislav: Quo vadis musica: premeny sociálnych funkcií
hudby. Bratislava: Veda, 2006.
tion”. In Popular Music and Society. Bowling Green University Popular Press, Winter
Behavioral Problems and Preferences for Heavy Metal and Rap Music: A Case Study
of a Southern Middle School”. In Deviant Behavior, No.11, 1990, p. 381-394; Gross,
L. Robert: Heavy Metal Music: A New Subculture in American Society”. In The
Journal of Popular Culture, 1990, No. 24, pp. 119-130.

reference to The Rhythm of Rock chapter. Theoreticians agree on the basic prem-
When researching rhythm as a driving movement with its own inner organisa-
tion62, in jazz and rock music particular aspects need to be considered when ana-
lysing their rhythm patterns.
Firstly, rhythm is associated with various musical and non-musical attributes,
which explains its differing roles in musical cultures around the world.63 It also
ever, comprehensive rhythm analysis, when using specialised computer or statisti-
cal methods, requires a distancing from the larger aspects to allow focusing on the

Musicologica Slovaca, Rhythmik und Metrik in traditionellen Musikkulturen, SAV
Bratislava 1990, p. 13.

Seashore, Carl Emil: Psychology of Music. New York: McGraw Hill Book Comp.,

and psychological aspects. These components together with regional and geographi-
plains the differences between, for example, the rhythms in African music, European
music, Indian music etc.

A complementarity of rhythm65, polyrhythm66 and polymetrical part settings67
in either rock or jazz will also contribute to a perception of a complex rhythm.
The beat-off beat principle, complementarity, polyrhythm, and polymetrics are
at the origin of rhythm patterns. However, the question remains as to whether
According to Ivan
the innate experience of a species, corresponding
to typical extreme life situations formulas of people’s ritual behaviour
the existence of archetypes is merely potential and they undergo an al-
teration after each execution, they are ambivalent and constantly call for new
interpretations …”68
The second issue arises when making a notated record of the rhythm69. Our
research into jazz and rock rhythm patterns is based on empirical methods and
consists of listening to recorded music and subsequently transcribing it using the
traditional European notational system70. For transcribing jazz and rock music this
type of notation is less than perfect, and there are several different options for
transcribing the same rhythm section. While the nature of a particular model is
not always adequately expressed by the musical notation, repeated comparative
checks help to identify deviations, nuances or errors.
65 A complementary rhythm pattern is created by a mutual complementary correlation
amongst the accents of the different lines in a composition. Traditional jazz is a typical
example of a complementary rhythm.
66 In complementary rhythm only one pattern is used. In polyrhythm two or more simul-
taneous patterns are used within the same metre.
67 Polymetrical part setting is a simultaneous progression of two or more meters. Poly-
68 ABC . Praha: Supraphon, 1984,
Analyse von Jazz und Rock”. In Jazzforschung

century-long debate over notational processes has resulted in two analytical meth-
ods: electronic diagrams including several quantitative methods of measurement, and
räumliche Prinzipen der Musikgestaltung.” In Musicologica Slovaca, Rhythmik und
Metrik in traditionellen Musikkulturen. Bratislava: SAV, 1990, p. 28.

Research Methods and Research Findings
This monograph follows the publication On the History of Jazz Music, it has the
associated with the chronological development of various rock styles, as com-
selected at random.71
When analysing the repetition of rhythm models it is essential to determine the
length of each single pattern72. A rhythm pattern is a section of the composition
73. In our research rhythm pattern sam-
ples were studied for the changes in their structures throughout the composition.
Since jazz and rock genres have evolved into complex, highly developed forms,
also likely that these patterns represent typical jazz and rock archetypal rhythmic
Therefore, at the beginning of our research we hypothesised as to whether jazz
and rock rhythm patterns exist in these genres as primary archetypal forms. The
transcribing rhythm patterns using a traditional notation. This was followed by an
analysis of the transcribed patterns together with records of their frequency in the
different jazz and rock styles in relation to their chronological sequence.
Another research objective was to identify the frequency of rhythm archetypes
in particular songs, to ascertain whether the occurrence of rock archetypes is any
different from that in jazz, what the probability of archetype occurrences is and
chetypes is increased by their tendency to constantly spur new variations in the

71 Using 823 various musical examples, the research into jazz and rock rhythm patterns
was carried out between 1990 and 1998. The preliminary results were published in the
monograph Kapitoly o jazze a rocku by Yvetta
72 Zaminer, Friedrich: Rhythmus und Zeitdauern – Organisation. Zweites Colloquium
der Walcker – Stiftung zur Terminologie der Musik des 20. Jahrhunderts. 1972,
73 In earlier jazz genres, rhythm pattern durations were approximately 3 to 5 minutes.
rhythm patterns are longer.
74 Previous studies on jazz styles characterised their rhythm patterns as an unmutable
element. Asriel, André: Jazz. Aspekte und Analysen. Berlin: VEB, 1985, p. 314-26,

The reworking of patterns in jazz music differs from that in rock. Whilst in jazz
the principle of improvisation, constant pattern changes, redeveloping or reinvent-
ing the model, and recreating new forms within a single song are used, in rock
music pattern repetitions are rather preferred. However, repetitions are not always
identical and nuances can occur as well. Hence a pattern repetition may become
section as well as real time. Unlike in jazz, where pattern changes occur within
a single piece, in rock music, the variations occur across several compositions in
which the same rhythm archetypes are found.
Jazz and rock patterns are closely associated with particular styles during
their developmental stages. Unlike European classical music, jazz and rock gen-
established in a particular style, it becomes and remains typical of the style, even
after the style itself ceases to be a progressive trend in jazz or rock development.
Research into jazz and rock patterns can illuminate any issues about the styles
which have remained obscure and chaotic as far as the mainly modern genres
are concerned. Furthermore, such research could also contribute to resolving the
or whether they are simply descriptive tools used by critics, or even mere inven-
tions by rock fans.75
By means of a structural rhythm analysis it is possible to not only identify the
characteristic rhythm patterns employed in particular jazz and rock style eras, but
also to identify the basic rhythm pattern - the archetype or proto-pattern which
characterises jazz and rock in general - that had already existed in common con-
sciousness at the origin of a particular genre. We refer to rhythm patterns in Afro-
American folk music, ragtime, and traditional jazz, to those used in rock and roll,
Rolling Stones. The early rhythm models should appear in all subsequent jazz and
Berendt, Joachim Ernst: Kniha o jazze. Bratislava: Supraphon, 1968. Das Jazzbuch.
Entwicklung und Bedeutung des Jazzmusik. Frankfurt: Fischer, 1953; Das Jazzbuch.
Von Rag bis Rock. Frankfurt: Fischer, 1973.
75 Gammond, Peter: The Oxford Companion to Popular Music. Oxford, New York 1991,
. ZAKR, Warszava 1986, Ward,
Edward & Stokes, Geoffrey & Tucker, Ken: Rock of Ages. The Rolling Stone History
of Rock and Roll. New York: Rolling Stone Press, 1986.

rock styles as the basic primary patterns: they are the archetypes that jazz or rock
music built upon and to which they keep returning in each era.
Another focus of our research was tempo. We gave it attention when it was one
elements. We tried to verify the hypothesis that jazz music prefers moderately fast
fast tempos prevail in mainstream jazz.76
We hypothesised that rhythm in jazz and rock is manifested through patterns
that represent rhythm archetypes. We aimed to identify the different archetypal
chetypes and forms that are only found in jazz and rock music. Throughout the
development of rock and jazz genres musicians have kept returning to the typical
archetypal patterns for their sources of inspiration. The history of jazz and rock
Despite that, the frequency of pattern occurrence and the pattern characteristics
themselves make it possible to identify typical jazz and rock archetypes.
Example a - jazz
76 Kneif, Tibor: Sachlexikon Rockmusik. Instrumente, Stile, Techniken, Industrie und
muzyki rozrywkowej. Warszava: ZAKR 1986; Wicke, Peter & Ziegenrücker, Wieland:
Rock, Pop, Jazz, Folk. Handbuch der populären Musik. Leipzig: VEB, 1985.

Example b - rock
The Examples a and b are the basic jazz and rock rhythm archetypes which,
sulted in patterns having a stock of unoriginal rhythms - the impulse to re-i ntroduce
typical jazz patterns was inevitable. The post-bop era jazz synthesis is found, for
Similarly in the 1970s,
rock music adopted rhythm patterns from other genres, for example jazz or waltz
rhythms, and some rhythmic principles from European classical music. Art rock
metre, which is generally typical of modern popular music, but they also absorb
This, in turn,
explains the emergence of punk rock with its rejection of any jazz or non-rock
features in its rhythms.

Some pure rock styles that did not adopt any jazz patterns are heavy metal, hard
core, speed metal and thrash metal. Their rhythm models are practically identical;
hence it is not possible to differentiate between them solely by rhythm pattern
analysis. All derive from the same musical base - heavy metal elements – and their
differentiation is through cultural and attitudinal characteristics.
Rock Pattern Findings
In the sampled rock music, of 420 patterns the rhythm archetypes were found in
293 examples, which represents 70% of cases. Thus the probability of rock rhythm
archetype occurence is 0.70 calculated using the following formula:
where m=293, n=420, and hence P =0.70.
This means that 7 out of 10 randomly chosen examples may contain rhythm
archetypes and 3 may feature different patterns. An archetype occurrence rate of
approximately 90% was found in post-rock and roll music, punk rock and heavy
rock, electronic rock and soft rock. The rate was approximately 50% in art rock,
hard core, speed metal and experimental rock. As little as 30% were found in the
Jazz Pattern Findings
Jazz rhythm archetypes were found in 178 instances of the 403 examples, which rep-
resents 44.1% of cases. The rest were different, variable, or products of spontaneous
creativity rather than repetition of archetypal models. Thus, the probability of a jazz
rhythm archetype occurrence is 0.44, which means that of ten randomly selected
examples, four may feature the jazz archetypes, and the remaining six might not.
It is also possible to calculate the probability of archetype occurrence in those
styles which adopt non-jazz elements, or where patterns are innovatively and crea-
tively re-worked.
We estimated a rhythm archetype repetition of less than 40% in free jazz, a style
which overturns conventional models, and a repetition of less than 30 % in the tra-
ditional jazz, where the typical jazz rhythm was only just emerging. We expected a
similar occurrence rate - less than 30% - in jazzrock, since rock rhythm archetypes

prevail in this particular jazz style. Approximately a 50% pattern occurrence was
found in bebop, cool jazz and west coast jazz styles, where jazz musicians have
tried to abandon jazz rhythm stereotypes and sought new means of expression. We
expect a pattern occurrence rate of about 60% in hard bop, 70% in soul jazz and
about 60% in swing. In ragtime music, no archetypes could be found.
In conclusion, the pattern repetition in rock music is 70% compared to 44 in
jazz; this shows that jazz music generally employs a far more creative approach
to pattern building.
The following tables show the probabilities of rhythm archetype occurrence in
particular jazz and rock styles. A further and extended quantitative study would
The Total number of Occurrrence of
No. of researched styles
researched patterns archetypes
Jazz 403 178 11
Rock 420 293 16
Probability of the archetype Probability of the archetype
Jazz 0.441 44 %
Rock 0.697 70 %
Jazz Genre Occurrence Rate
Ragtime 0 %
Traditional jazz 30 %
Be bop 50 %
Cool jazz 50 %
West coast jazz 50 %
Hard bop 60 %
Soul jazz 70 %
Free jazz 40 %
Mainstream 50 %
Jazz-rock and Fusion music 30 %

Rock Genre Occurrence Rate
Rock and roll 70 %
Post-rock and roll 90 %
Punk rock, heavy metal 90 %
Hard rock, new wave, thrash metal, groove 80 %
Gothic rock, electronic rock, soft rock 60 %
Art ock, hard core, speed metal, experimental rock 50 %
New age 30 %
The world-wide adoption of jazz and rock music, irregardless of nationality,
implies a universal acceptance of the basic jazz and rock norms, including rhythm
archetypes. In so accepting, musicians will employ rhythm archetypes with their
repetitions as the characteristic element. High proportions of jazz and rock ar-
chetypes are associated with greater uniformity in these genres and lesser use of
national rhythms. In this respect, jazz and rock music are tending to become a
certain universal model; hence jazzmen often say that jazz is cosmopolitan and
supranational music which has developed from syntheses of many cultures. The
process is ongoing even despite distances between countries.
Along with the typical rhythm archetypes, which are the essence of jazz and
marketing of rock, and partially also of jazz music carries a risk that the more
non-archetypal rhythm models are used in the compositions, the less successful
their sales will be.

This book follows the work that commenced in its counterpart, On the History of
Jazz Music. Both books are the result of a major resarch study in which 403 jazz
rhythm patterns and 420 rock patterns were analysed in order to identify rhythm
archetypes in both music genres.
Using musical and theoretical analyses, On the History of Rock Music follows
the development of rock music from its origins up to the present time. It focuses
on the relationships between the sound, improvisations and rhythms in particular
characteristic elements of rock music. The beat-offbeat principle, polyrhythms
and poly-metrics are fundamental to rock rhythm patterns. Patterns behave as ar-
experience of a species.
opment. In comparison with jazz, rock music more frequently uses the principle
of pattern repetitions.
By the means of rhythm analyses, it is possible to not only identify the charac-
teristic rhythm patterns used in particular rock style eras, but also to determine the
basic rhythm pattern – the archetype – which characterises rock music in general.
tendency to engender new variations.
archetypes were found in 293. That means a 70% archetype occurrence rate or
pattern repetition, and a probability of 0.70. In conclusion, out of every ten re-
searched rock patterns, seven possess rhythm archetypes, and the remaining three
use different rhythm structures.