THE ROOTS OF
ROCK AND ROLL
“It’s like an act of murder; you play
with intent to commit something.”
– Duke Ellington on Jazz

Chapter 1: The Roots of Rock and Roll from The History of Rock & Roll
by Thomas Larson | 5th Edition | 9781465278623
Property of Kendall Hunt Publishing
Chapter 1: The Roots of Rock and Roll from The History of Rock & Roll
by Thomas Larson | 5th Edition | 9781465278623
Property of Kendall Hunt Publishing
2 CHAPTER 1 The Roots of Rock and Roll
KEY Tin Pan Alley Gold, platinum and Melisma
The Swing Era diamond records Rhythm and Blues
TERMS Race music Disc jockey (DJ) Doo-wop
Hillbilly music The Moondog House British folk tradition
Cover Rock and Roll Party Bristol sessions
Acoustical/electrical Top 40 Grand Ole Opry
process Blues Cowboy songs
Album Work song, shout, and Western swing
Single field holler Bluegrass
Major labels Mississippi Delta Honky tonk
Independent labels Country blues Southern Gospel
Billboard magazine AAB lyric form
Record Industry Classic blues
Association of Jazz
America (RIAA) Black Gospel
KEY Bing Crosby Bessie Smith Ralph Peer
Frank Sinatra Robert Johnson The Carter Family
FIGURES Benny Goodman Thomas Dorsey Jimmie Rodgers
Pat Boone Louis Jordan and His Bill Monroe
Alan Freed Tympany Five Lester Flatt/Earl Scruggs
Moondog Frankie Lymon and the Hank Williams
Todd Storz Teenagers
ROCK AND ROLL: THE MUSIC
THAT CHANGED THE WORLD
When rock and roll exploded onto the American landscape in the mid-1950s, it
marked nothing less than a defining moment in history. In many ways its birth
was a manifestation of a seismic shift that was already taking place in our cultural
fabric: from an elitist to a working class ethos; from an adult oriented society to
one that glorified youth; and from one where art was defined by European stan-
dards to one where it was defined in purely American terms. Rock and roll was
purely American, as were all of its musical ancestors, which included the blues,
jazz, Rhythm and Blues, gospel, hillbilly, country, bluegrass and honky tonk. And
like America, rock and roll didn’t sit still for long; it very quickly began to evolve
as it embraced a wide variety of influences that ranged from new technologies to
interpretations by British imitators. As a result, within just a few years there were
a plethora of styles—folk rock, soul, psychedelic, hard rock, art rock, etc.—that
all fit under the rock umbrella.
The emergence of rock and roll also signaled a major shift in the nature
of our popular music. Unlike the pop music of the first half of the 20th cen-
tury, which was largely conceived by an industry based in New York City and
watered down to appeal to the largest audience possible—in other words, white,
middle-class adults—rock and roll was from the South and middle states, and was
Chapter 1: The Roots of Rock and Roll from The History of Rock & Roll
by Thomas Larson | 5th Edition | 9781465278623
Property of Kendall Hunt Publishing
CHAPTER 1 The Roots of Rock and Roll 3
decidedly more rural, more lower class, more dynamic, more African American,
and more youth oriented. Unlike the music of Tin Pan Alley, rock incubated
in the streets in a grassroots fashion, so it had a mind of its own and would not
easily take orders from anyone. Rock’s sense of independence has remained
intact—even today it continues to demonstrate a remarkable virus-like resis-
tance to the constant meddling by the pop music industry. This is in fact one
of the central themes that runs through the music’s history: every time the
corporate types appear to have harnessed the music for their own self-interest,
rock seems to somehow wriggle free and reinvent itself. Like the musicians
who create it, rock in this sense is rebellious and self-determined, resentful of
authority, and defies subordination.
But above all, rock and roll, simply stated, is, always has been and always
will be, the music of youth and all that goes with it. During the mid-1950s, it
exploded onto the American cultural landscape through the insistence of small
independent record labels, renegade radio DJs and a teen audience that wouldn’t
take the watered down industry product any more. For the first time in his-
tory, the music of the underprivileged and disaffected, the angry and unruly, the
idealistic and discontented would emerge as America’s most popular music. As
rock and roll took its place on center stage, it changed our society, and in turn
reflected those changes within itself.
Chapters 2–13 of this text chronicle the history of the music and the impor-
tant events and personalities that shaped it. But before we get there, let’s take a
look at the American music scene in the first half of the 20th century and see
how the groundwork was laid for the rock and roll revolution.
THE EARLY YEARS OF AMERICAN POP MUSIC
Tin Pan Alley
America’s pop music industry was created in the late 1800s when the publishers KEY TERMS
and songwriters of Tin Pan Alley began to supply vaudeville and Broadway Tin Pan Alley The
shows with popular songs. These songs were also made available in written term describing the
music publishing industry in
form to the general public through the sale of sheet music. Tin Pan Alley was
the first half of the 20th century.
originally an actual place, on 28th Street between Broadway and 6th Avenue
in New York, where many of the earliest publishing companies set up shop.
Although most eventually moved uptown, the name stuck and today is gener-
ally used to describe the music publishing industry as it operated in the first
half of the 20th century. The music of the Tin Pan Alley composers defined
much of our popular song catalogue of the era, and was eventually used not
only for theatrical shows but also for popular songs, Hollywood movies, and
TIN PAN ALLEY
jazz standards. Among the greatest Tin Pan Alley composers were Irving Berlin COMPOSERS
(“God Bless America,” “White Christmas”); George and Ira Gershwin (“I Got
nnIrving Berlin
Rhythm,” “’S Wonderful”); Richard Rodgers, teaming with lyricists Lorenz nnGeorge and Ira Gershwin
Hart (“My Funny Valentine”) and Oscar Hammerstein II (Broadway musicals nnRichard Rodgers
nnLorenz Hart
South Pacific, Oklahoma, The Sound of Music); and Cole Porter (“I’ve Got You
nnOscar Hammerstein II
Under My Skin”). nnCole Porter
Chapter 1: The Roots of Rock and Roll from The History of Rock & Roll
by Thomas Larson | 5th Edition | 9781465278623
Property of Kendall Hunt Publishing
4 CHAPTER 1 The Roots of Rock and Roll
The First Pop Singers
One of the first important pop singers in 20th century America was Al Jolson
who, singing in blackface as minstrel singers had done in the mid-1800s, became
Broadway’s biggest star in the early 1900s. In 1927 Jolson also starred in the
first successful talking picture, The Jazz Singer. As recordings and radio began
to replace sheet music as the most popular medium for the distribution of pop
music, the first true pop singers, known as crooners emerged. Rudy Vallee, who
used a megaphone to project his voice (before amplification was used) became
one of the first entertainers to effectively use radio to reach stardom in the
TRIVIA NOTE
1920s. Bing Crosby (1903-1977) became the most influential crooner with his
Frank Sinatra was easy-going charm and witty style of singing ballads. Starting his career in 1926
the first pop singer
making records with the Paul Whiteman Orchestra (with whom he had his first
to create a unique personal style
#1 hit in 1928 with “Ol’ Man River”), Crosby began working in network radio
and film in 1931, and eventually starred in more than 60 movies before his death
in 1977. His recording of “White Christmas” from the 1942 movie Holiday Inn
rose to the #1 spot on the charts, won a Grammy Award for best song of 1942,
and eventually sold over 30 million copies, making it the best-selling vinyl single
in history. (Elton John’s “Candle in the Wind” broke this record in 1997 with
nearly 40 million copies sold in CD single format.)
The first pop singer to create a unique personal style and image was Frank
Sinatra. Influenced by jazz singers Louis Armstrong and Billie Holiday, Sinatra
(1915-1998) took liberties with melodies and interpreted songs in
his own way. Starting as a big band singer with the Tommy Dorsey
Orchestra, Sinatra became a solo artist and film star in the 1950s with a
tough-guy attitude and good looks that made him popular among both
male and female fans. Although he condemned rock and roll at first,
Sinatra’s off-screen public macho posturing, womanizing, and associa-
tions with shadowy figures in fact became a sort of blueprint for many
rock stars that followed him. He also spawned a generation of dark and
handsome Italian singers such as Dean Martin, Tony Bennett, and Vic
Damone that also had considerable pop success.
Frank Sinatra
SINATRA ON Frank Sinatra, who was the object of shrieking female fans in the 1940s, originally
dismissed rock and roll, commenting that “It is sung, played, and written for the most
ROCK AND ROLL
part by cretinous goons, and by means of its almost imbecilic reiteration and sly,
lewd, in plain fact dirty, lyrics it manages to be the martial music of every side-burned
delinquent on the face of the earth.” However, his tune quickly changed, and by 1960
he cohosted a network TV special with Elvis Presley on which the two sang each other’s
signature songs, “Love Me Tender” and “Witchcraft.”
Chapter 1: The Roots of Rock and Roll from The History of Rock & Roll
by Thomas Larson | 5th Edition | 9781465278623
Property of Kendall Hunt Publishing
CHAPTER 1 The Roots of Rock and Roll 5
The Swing Era
During the Swing Era (1935–1946), big band jazz (now referred to as swing)
became the dominant form of pop music. Swing brought the recording industry
back to life after it was almost killed by the Depression. It helped the country get
through WWII, as many of the biggest Swing Era hits were sentimental in nature
and reflected the mood of anxiety that accompanied the war. Swing also firmly KEY TERMS
established itself as music to dance to, and spawned dozens of dance fads such as Swing Era The
the Fox Trot, Lindy Hop, Jitterbug, and Rumba. The term “swing” was used as a name given to the
period from 1935–1946 when big
marketing ploy to overcome the negative connotations that still persisted about
band jazz was the most popular
jazz in the 1930s. During the early years of the Swing Era, most of the hit records
music in America.
were of original material written and arranged by the bands themselves. Later,
as swing became more popular, most of the hits were novelty, sing-along, and
sentimental songs written by Tin Pan Alley professionals that featured the band
vocalists. It was in this way that the careers of Frank Sinatra, Doris Day, Peggy
Lee, and others were launched.
The first star of the Swing Era was the unassuming Benny Goodman
(1909-1986), whose meteoric rise to fame started at the Palomar Ballroom in
Los Angeles on August 21, 1935. Hundreds of teens showed up that night to
hear and dance to the music they had been hearing on the NBC network radio
program Let’s Dance. One secret of Goodman’s success was the arrangements he
had bought from black musicians such as Fletcher Henderson and Don Redman TRIVIA NOTE
that up to that point had rarely been heard outside of Harlem. By virtue of being The unassuming
Benny Goodman was
white, Goodman was able to bring the music of African American culture to
the first star of the Swing Era.
the mass white audience, in much the same way that Elvis Presley would do 20
years later. In his wake, hundreds of other bands that looked like Goodman’s and
sounded like pale imitations of the Harlem musicians who created the music
provided the country with the soundtrack to an era.
The Post-War Transitional Years
From 1946 to 1954, the years between the Swing Era and the early years of
rock and roll, the pop music business was in a state of transition. Although the
major record labels continued to successfully promote mainstream pop artists
such as Sinatra and Patti Page, race music (later known as Rhythm and Blues)
and hillbilly music (later called Country Western) were becoming increasingly
popular among a growing, albeit segmented audience. Around this same time, a
Race music A
number of small, independent record labels emerged that specialized in making
catchall term to
race and hillbilly records. In spite of the fact that by 1952 there were around 100
describe any records or songs by
independents, their mark on the industry was still negligible—only five of the black artists, including the blues
more than 150 singles that became million sellers during this period came from and what would later be known as
Rhythm and Blues.
independent labels.
Hillbilly music The traditional
On the rare occasion that an R&B or country record did break through
old time music of the rural
and become a hit, the strategy that major labels often employed was to quickly
southern United States, with
record a cover version by a pop singer who had a broad commercial appeal. origins in English folk music.
Covers were usually stripped of anything that might be offensive to any seg- Hillbilly music is the foundation of
modern country music.
ment of record buyers, such as any traces of ethnic vocal delivery or off-color
Cover A new recording of a
lyrics. As a result, most covers ended up sounding sanitized and antiseptic, even
charting song that seeks to ‘cover’
laughable. The poster child for this tactic could have been Pat Boone, whose up the original song.
Chapter 1: The Roots of Rock and Roll from The History of Rock & Roll
by Thomas Larson | 5th Edition | 9781465278623
Property of Kendall Hunt Publishing
6 CHAPTER 1 The Roots of Rock and Roll
watered-down covers of Fats Domino’s “Ain’t That a Shame” in 1955 and Little
Richard’s “Tutti Frutti” in 1956 both outsold the original versions.
Covers were an effective strategy for the 1946–1954 period, and as a result
were an obstacle to commercial success for many R&B and country artists and
their independent labels. However, once white teenagers started demanding the
real thing, covers were no longer an effective marketing approach.
THE RECORD INDUSTRY
Record Sales: 1920–1954
Although Victrola phonograph players had been around since the early 1900s, it
took several years before they became popular with consumers and there were
any significant record sales. Before 1920, two of the most popular artists were
opera singer Enrico Caruso and concert bandleader John Phillip Sousa (com-
poser of “The Stars and Stripes Forever”). The first jazz recording, “Livery Stable
Blues” made in 1917 by the Original Dixieland Jass Band was one of the first
records to sell over one million copies. Throughout the 1920s, record sales were
generally strong, hovering around $100 million a year. However, when radio first
became popular in the mid-1920s and the Great Depression hit in 1929, record
sales went into a tailspin, dropping to $6 million almost immediately, causing
most of the smaller labels to go out of business.
Helped by the popularity of crooners like Bing Crosby and the big band
music of the Swing Era, record sales rebounded throughout the 1930s and
1940s. By 1945, sales were back up to $109 million; after wartime restrictions
on shellac were lifted, sales soared to $218 million in 1946 where they leveled
off for the next eight years. Helping the recovery was the introduction of the
KEY TERMS Duo Jr. in 1932, the first affordable and portable electric turntable, which sold
for $16.50. By 1934 jukeboxes began popping up in thousands of restaurants
Acoustical process
The process used and nightclubs around the country, which in some years accounted for as much
before 1925 in which an acoustical as 40 percent of all record sales. The mid-1920s saw a dramatic improvement
horn captured and transferred
in the technology used to make recordings. Before 1925, recordings were made
sound vibrations to a stylus that
cut grooves onto a wax disc. using the acoustical process, in which an acoustical horn captured the sound
of the musicians huddled in front of it and transferred the sound vibrations
Record Sales in Millions of $

1920s 1930 1945 1946 1954
Chapter 1: The Roots of Rock and Roll from The History of Rock & Roll
by Thomas Larson | 5th Edition | 9781465278623
Property of Kendall Hunt Publishing
CHAPTER 1 The Roots of Rock and Roll 7
nnColumbia—founded in 1885 in New York nnCapitol—1942, Los Angeles THE MAJOR
nnRCA Victor—1901, New York nnMercury—1946, Chicago
LABELS IN THE
nnDecca—1934, New York nnMGM—1946, Hollywood
EARLY FIFTIES
to a stylus that cut grooves onto a wax disc. Because the shellac records that
resulted spun at 78 rpm, only three minutes of music could be recorded on a
side. Because of the poor frequency response of the process, records also sounded
tinny. In 1925, the electrical process was introduced, where microphones were
used to convert the sound waves into an electrical signal, greatly improving
sound quality.
After World War II, magnetic tape was increasingly used to record master
tapes from which records were pressed. Among the many advantages of tape
recording over disc recording is the ability to edit the master tape. An engineer
could now construct a new version of a song by splicing two or more separate
Electrical process
takes (or versions) together, eliminating any mistakes that may have been present
The recording
in the original takes. This was a giant leap forward for recording artists, who pre- process in which microphones are
viously had to strive for cutting a perfect take to disc, or settle for an imperfect used to convert sound waves into
an electrical signal.
one. Tape is also cheap, and can be reused many times, allowing an engineer to
Album The 33-1/3 rpm 12” LP
simply record over a bad take to further cut costs. It also allowed for longer songs
(long playing) format introduced
to be recorded, as tape reels could hold up to 30 minutes of music, eliminating
by Columbia Records in 1948.
the 3-minute limit of the 78-rpm disc.
Single The 45 rpm 7” format
The post-war years also saw dramatic changes in the way recordings were introduced in 1949 by RCA Victor.
manufactured and sold to consumers. In 1948, Columbia introduced the 12-inch
33-1/3 rpm LP (long-playing) album format. In addition to an increased play-
ing time of 23 minutes of music per side, LPs were made of vinylite (vinyl),
which offered superior fidelity and made the records less breakable and easier
to distribute. The next year, RCA Victor introduced a rival format, the 7-inch
45 rpm single format, also on vinyl (later on polystyrene). RCA also introduced
a low-cost portable turntable that included an attachment enabling several 45s
to be stacked, allowing the listener a sequence of uninterrupted songs to play.
Within a few years most record labels were releasing product on both formats.
LPs became the choice of adults, who bought console hi-fi systems and placed
nnKing—founded in 1945 in Cincinnati by Syd Nathan IMPORTANT
nnSpecialty—1945, Los Angeles by Art Rupe
INDEPENDENT
nnModern—1945, Los Angeles by Jules and Saul Bihari
LABELS FROM THE
nnImperial—1945, Los Angeles by Lew Chudd
nnChess—1947, Chicago by Phil and Leonard Chess (originally named Aristocrat) LATE FORTIES AND
nnAtlantic—1948, New York by Ahmet Ertigan and Herb Abramson
EARLY FIFTIES
nnDuke/Peacock—1949, Houston by Don Robey
nnSun—1953, Memphis by Sam Phillips
Chapter 1: The Roots of Rock and Roll from The History of Rock & Roll
by Thomas Larson | 5th Edition | 9781465278623
Property of Kendall Hunt Publishing
8 CHAPTER 1 The Roots of Rock and Roll
them in the living room along with the TV set. The cheaper 45s became more
popular with teens, who were able to buy the latest hit single and play them in
their bedrooms on their portable players. In 1958, the world standard for stereo
was established and the first stereo LPs were sold soon after.
Record Labels: The Majors and the Independents
Over the early years of the 20th century, the largest corporate record labels
(known simply as the major labels) had built up well-established distribution
networks and alliances with radio stations, record stores and jukebox operators
to distribute and promote their product. By virtue of their nearly total control
of the marketplace in the pre-rock and roll era, the majors (of which there were
six) were able to prevent most records that they did not distribute from making
an impact on the national charts. Even though most majors had a few R&B and
country artists on their rosters, these singers were considered to have a specialty
market outside the mainstream, and as a result were not marketed as heavily.
Thus, when Mercury Records decided to release “Tennessee Waltz” in 1950, it
KEY TERMS was given to pop singer Patti Page rather than a country singer who might have
Major labels The been a better fit for the song. Even though Page’s record became a #1 hit, for the
largest corporate most part the majors simply ignored R&B and country. This provided an open-
record labels.
ing for smaller, independent labels, or “indies” to find a niche in the market,
Independent labels The small
and by the mid-1950s there were more than 100 of them scattered around the
startup labels that began emerging
in large numbers in the 1940s and country. It was these indie labels that played an important role in fueling the
1950s. growth of R&B and country music in the post-war years.
Billboard magazine The The typical major was headquartered in New York, Chicago, or Los Angeles
industry magazine that charts
with a team of producers, talent scouts, A&R (artist & repertoire) staff, song plug-
record sales.
gers and advance men. Professional composers, arrangers, and recording studios
were also utilized to carefully craft the product to standards that would appeal to
the widest possible audience to maximize sale potential. Independent labels, on
the other hand, could be found in any town, and might be operating out of the
back room of a store, a basement, garage, or even the trunk of a car. The small
staff (often less than five, usually just one or two) handled all details, from find-
ing the talent to distributing the records in stores and meeting with disc jockeys
to get airplay. Although some indies had their own small studios, storage rooms
or garages were often used as makeshift studios. With their low overhead and
constant struggle for survival, indies were more willing to take risks and quickly
change business tactics to keep up with emerging industry trends.
Despite their competitive disadvantages, the indie labels were perfectly posi-
tioned to grab a larger share of the record market as a growing number of white
teenagers started to turn away from major label pop to listen to R&B. But to
connect with this new audience, they needed some help along the way, which
they got from a group of renegade radio disc jockeys (more on that in a moment).
Hot 100s and Gold Records
The most reliable source for charting record sales throughout the Rock Era
has been Billboard magazine. First published in 1894, Billboard began chart-
ing songs in 1940. In 1942 the magazine began to track the emerging country
Chapter 1: The Roots of Rock and Roll from The History of Rock & Roll
by Thomas Larson | 5th Edition | 9781465278623
Property of Kendall Hunt Publishing
CHAPTER 1 The Roots of Rock and Roll 9
and R&B styles under a single category “Western and Race,” but eventually
split them into two separate charts, “Country and Western” and “Rhythm and
Blues” in 1949. From 1955 until 1958, it published a number of separate charts,
including the Top 100, Best Sellers in Stores, Most Played in Jukeboxes, and Most
Played by Disc Jockeys, all of which were merged into the new Hot 100 in 1958.
The chart listings used in this book for singles are from the Hot 100 (or the Top
100 chart that preceded it), unless otherwise noted. KEY TERMS
The RIAA (Recording Industry Association of America, the trade Record Industry
group representing the record industry) was founded in 1952 and began certi- Association of
America (RIAA) The industry
fying singles with sales of one million units as gold and in 1958 certifying two
trade group that certifies record
million units as platinum. In 1989 these standards were lowered to 500,000 and
sales and designates gold,
one million respectively, making it much easier for a single to achieve gold status. platinum and diamond records.
The gold standard for albums was set in 1958 at 500,000; starting in 1976 albums
with sales of one million were designated as platinum. In 1999 the RIAA also
established the diamond certification for albums with sales of 10 million. As of
this writing, 115 albums have achieved diamond status. In the early 2000s, the
RIAA filed a number of lawsuits against file sharing sites such as Napster and
the users of such sites on behalf of the recording industry. This controversial
maneuver, which ultimately became a losing cause for the RIAA, is discussed at
length in Chapter 13.
Although the Beatles and Elvis Presley are the all-time runaway record sales leaders, GOLD, PLATINUM
the 1970s pop/country group the Eagles certainly deserve credit for their own sales
AND DIAMOND
achievements. Because the 1976 platinum distinction for album sales of one million
units was not applied retroactively, the first album to achieve this status was Eagles/
Their Greatest Hits: 1971–1975, which achieved platinum status on February 24, 1976,
just weeks after its release. Today the album holds the distinction of being the third best
selling LP in U.S. history with sales of 29 million (and more than 40 million worldwide).
The Eagles currently have eight albums listed in the top 100 selling albums of all time
(U.S.), three of which have achieved diamond status. In all, 16 Eagles LPs have achieved
platinum or multi-platinum status.
The Birth of Radio and Important Early DJs
The first commercial radio station in America, KDKA in Pittsburgh, began
broadcasting in 1920. Throughout the early 1920s, radio experienced explosive
growth: by 1924 there were nearly 600 commercial stations broadcasting and
three million receivers in homes. In the late 1920s, NBC and CBS established
radio networks that provided programming to affiliate stations throughout the
country. However, in the late 1940s and early 1950s, as television appeared on
the scene many analysts were predicting radio’s demise. Radio stations up to this
point had programmed a variety of material, including live music, drama, variety
Chapter 1: The Roots of Rock and Roll from The History of Rock & Roll
by Thomas Larson | 5th Edition | 9781465278623
Property of Kendall Hunt Publishing
10 CHAPTER 1 The Roots of Rock and Roll
shows, sporting events, and news. With TV’s dramatic growth in popularity, radio
stations in the 1950s began concentrating their efforts on playing music and
emphasizing local programming rather than relying on the network feed. These
trends led to the rise in popularity of the local disc jockey or DJ. DJs often
had complete control of the style of their show and the records that they played.
TRIVIA NOTE After a time, it was not enough just to have a unique show, and many DJs started
Riley B. King began developing flamboyant and eccentric on-air personalities. They became show-
his career as a DJ. King men; in fact, several early rock and roll artists actually began their careers as DJs,
was known on the air as the “Blues
including one at WDIA in Memphis named Riley B. King. King was known
Boy”; he later adopted those
on the air as the “Blues Boy”; he later adopted those initials and became known
initials and became known simply
as B. B. King. simply as B. B. King.
Like the nation itself, in the late 1940s and early 1950s radio was segregated:
a small number of black stations programmed jazz and R&B to black audiences,
while white stations played pop and country for white audiences. However,
R&B was becoming increasingly popular during the 1946–54 transitional period
with white teenagers, who responded to the way the music was more emotional
and viscerally exciting than conventional pop. To get their R&B fix, these teens
began tuning in to black stations such as WDIA (“America’s Only 50,000 Watt
Negro Radio Station”), WERD in Atlanta, and KXLW in St. Louis. Among the
most popular black DJs in R&B radio were “Yo’ Ol’ Swingmaster” Al Benson in
Chicago, “Jockey Jack” Gibson in Atlanta, Tommy “Dr. Jive” Smalls in New York,
and “Professor Bop” in Shreveport.
KEY TERMS As the audience for R&B grew, the more attentive white DJs picked up on
Disc jockey (DJ) the trend and also began to play R&B records. Early white DJs who programmed
A radio announcer
R&B included Hunter Hancock (Huntin’ with Hunter) at KFVD and KGFJ in
who spins records (discs)
Los Angeles, George “Cat Man” Stiles at WNJR in Newark, George “Hound
interspersed with lively banter. The
first DJ is believed to have been Al Dog” Lorenz at WKBW in Buffalo, and “Symphony Sid” Torin at WBMS in
Jarvis of KFWB in Los Angeles, who Boston and later WOV in New York. By connecting the rapidly expanding needs
was injecting his own personality
of the teenage nation with R&B and rock and roll records, these renegade DJs,
into his show as early as 1932.
both black and white, essentially saved radio from television’s onslaught. For all
its strengths as a medium for family entertainment, TV could not connect with
the young in the same direct way that radio could. By playing rock and roll
records (which was also—conveniently—cheap programming), radio could pin-
point its audience with deadly accuracy. It was also portable: teens could listen
at home or after school on the newly introduced transistor radio, or in their cars
while cruising at night.
The most famous and influential of all the white DJs was Alan Freed (1921–
1965). Freed was a former jazz musician from Pennsylvania who was entrepre-
neurial, flamboyant, a hard worker, and a hard drinker. In June 1951 he took over
the late-night Record Rendezvous show on Cleveland station WJW and turned
TRIVIA NOTE
it into an R&B program after seeing first-hand how white teenagers enthusiasti-
Alan Freed (1921–
cally bought R&B records at a local store. Freed, who often drank while on the
1965) was the most
air, developed a wacky personality and renamed the show The Moondog House
famous and influential of all the
white DJs. Rock and Roll Party (he sometimes howled like a dog during the show opening).
Encouraged by the program’s popularity, Freed’s next move was to promote
Chapter 1: The Roots of Rock and Roll from The History of Rock & Roll
by Thomas Larson | 5th Edition | 9781465278623
Property of Kendall Hunt Publishing
CHAPTER 1 The Roots of Rock and Roll 11
a dance that featured the same artists whose records he played. The Moondog
Coronation Ball was set for the 10,000-seat Cleveland Arena in March 1952, but
a near riot ensued as an overflow crowd of over 21,000 tried to get in, forcing
the cancellation of the show. Later concert attempts proved successful however,
and Freed’s growing popularity led to his being hired by WINS in New York in
September 1954. Freed named his new program The Rock and Roll Show, and
began calling himself “Mr. Rock and Roll”. Ratings for WINS soared, and Freed
became immensely popular; however, he also became an easy target for a grow-
ing backlash against rock and roll by conservative and religious groups. Freed
eventually became the focus of a congressional investigation into the music busi-
ness in 1959 that ultimately ended his career (more on that in Chapter 3).
When Alan Freed moved to WINS in 1954, he was forced to change the name of his MOONDOG
show from The Moondog House Rock and Roll Party to The Rock and Roll Show by a blind
street musician who dressed up in a Viking costume. Thomas Louis Hardin claimed that
he had in fact used the name Moondog for many years, and that by using the name for
his radio show, Freed was infringing on Hardin’s right to make a living. After Hardin filed
suit, Judge Carroll Walter awarded him $7,500 and forbade Freed from using the name
Moondog. Although Alan Freed did not coin the term Rock and Roll (it was a black
euphemism for sex that had been around for at least 30 years), he undoubtedly helped
connect the label to the music for an ever-widening audience.
Just as DJs such as Alan Freed were playing important roles in the incubation of
rock and roll, a new radio format was emerging that would ultimately under-
mine their influence. Top 40 was the brainchild of Todd Storz, the owner of a
small group of radio stations, including ratings cellar-dweller KOWH in Omaha.
While at a tavern located across the street from the station one night in 1955
(although some say the year was 1953), Storz and his companions noticed that
patrons were plugging the jukebox to play the same songs over and over, and KEY TERMS
when the bar closed, the waitresses took their tip money and played those Top 40 The radio
songs again. Storz and his program director wrote down the names of the top format in which the
40 top selling songs are played
songs and began playing them throughout the day on KOWH, eliminating
in repetition, first developed by
the classical, country, and other programs the station had been playing. Within Todd Storz at KOWH in Omaha,
two years, KOWH went from last to first in the Omaha market, and Storz Nebraska.
was able to buy other stations in New Orleans, Kansas City, Minneapolis, and
Miami, which he formatted in the same way. Top 40 was popular with listeners
because they knew that they were never more than a few minutes away from
hearing their favorite song played, and it quickly spread throughout the indus-
try. Ultimately the Top 40 format had a homogenizing effect on radio, limiting
playlists all over America to mainstream pop singles. And, of course, it further
diminished the power of the DJ, who in the end was shut out from selecting the
songs that he played on his show.
Chapter 1: The Roots of Rock and Roll from The History of Rock & Roll
by Thomas Larson | 5th Edition | 9781465278623
Property of Kendall Hunt Publishing
12 CHAPTER 1 The Roots of Rock and Roll
THE BLACK ROOTS OF ROCK AND ROLL
The blues is a uniquely American musical form, born in the Southern middle
states sometime between the years 1880 and 1900. It evolved from the work
KEY TERMS songs, shouts, and field hollers sung by slaves in plantation fields and prison
Blues The form camps. Songs sung to accompany various daily jobs and duties were a functional
developed in the
part of everyday life in Africa and a celebration of doing work to improve the
Mississippi Delta and other
quality of one’s life. In the New World however, the very nature of the work
Southern locales in the late 19th
century that incorporates a 12-bar song began to change, as the singer was no longer doing work for himself but for
verse, AAB lyric form, and tonalities someone else—and the work no longer improved his quality of life. Over time,
from the blues scale.
the songs sung in the fields therefore became personal expressions of pain and
Work songs, shouts, and field
oppression. Singing work songs and field hollers became a catharsis for feelings
hollers African song forms used
to accompany work and other of lost love, sexual frustration, poverty, jealousy, and hard times. It is from this
aspects of everyday life that were context that the blues evolved.
adapted by slaves on plantations
After the Civil War, thousands of freed slaves began traveling through the
and Southern work camps.
South, looking for work, armed with no job skills to speak of other than as a
Mississippi Delta The 250 mile
common laborer. Once Reconstruction ended, life became increasingly bleak
long area of Mississippi stretching
from Memphis south to Vicksburg for many of them, as newly enacted Jim Crow laws and racial oppression became
that is widely believed to be the as commonplace as the hard work and poverty. Singing in work camps, street
birthplace of the blues.
corners, and juke joints for food and tips was one of the few professions available
Country blues The earliest
to a black man in which he wasn’t directly working for the white man (preach-
form of the blues, performed by
ing was another, and in fact many of the first blues singers were former preach-
solo male singers accompanying
themselves on guitar. ers). Today many scholars speculate that the blues incubated in the Mississippi
AAB lyric form The format of Delta, a 250-mile oval of land stretching south from Memphis, Tennessee, to
most blues poetry, in which each Vicksburg, Mississippi.
verse is comprised of three lines,
the second of which is a repeat of
CHARACTERISTICS 1. 12-bar musical form
2. Three-phrase AAB lyrical form
OF THE BLUES
3. Emotional, personal lyrics convey feelings of lust, lost love, jealousy, suffering,
hard times, etc.
THE FIRST BLUES SINGERS
The first blues performers were solo singers who accompanied themselves on the
guitar in a rambling and spontaneous fashion that became known as country blues.
These performers worked out the basic standard blues formula: a three-phrase
AAB lyric form of 12-bar length, with each phrase answered by the guitar
Chapter 1: The Roots of Rock and Roll from The History of Rock & Roll
by Thomas Larson | 5th Edition | 9781465278623
Property of Kendall Hunt Publishing
CHAPTER 1 The Roots of Rock and Roll 13
in a call-and-response fashion. This evolution occurred in the backwoods away
from almost everyone who might have been interested, and before there were
any recording devices, so documentation of exactly how it happened is scarce.
One of the first to archive the blues was W. C. Handy, a bandleader and former
schoolteacher from Alabama who in 1903 heard a man playing and singing at
TRIVIA NOTE
the train station in Tutwiler, Mississippi. In his autobiography Handy wrote: “As
In 1929, the
he played, he pressed a knife on the strings of the guitar in a manner popularized Depression almost
by Hawaiian guitarists who used steel bars. ‘Goin’ where the Southern cross’ the killed the record industry, and did
manage to finish off the classic
Dog’. The singer repeated the line three times, accompanying himself on the
guitar with the weirdest music I had ever heard. The tune stayed in my mind.”
Realizing the commercial potential of this new music, Handy became the first
to publish blues songs, including “Memphis Blues” in 1912 and “St. Louis Blues”
in 1914. Both were huge hits through the sale of sheet music, and earned Handy
the title “Father of the Blues.” The blues sold on sheet music remained popular
until 1917 when the first jazz recording started the jazz craze, and consumers
began to buy more records.
THE FIRST BLUES RECORDINGS
The blues remained popular throughout the 1920s with the first commercially
sold blues recordings by what became known as the classic blues singers. When
“Crazy Blues” by Mamie Smith sold one million copies within a year of its 1920
release, record companies realized that there was a huge untapped black con-
sumer market. Most of the classic blues recordings were released on small inde-
pendent labels such as Vocalion, Black Swan, and Okeh that specialized in race
music, a market that the major labels were largely unwilling to pursue. Although KEY TERMS
many of these female singers were merely singing pop tunes with a tragic deliv- Classic blues An
early form of the
ery (and nearly all the records had the word “blues” in the title), some of them,
blues from the 1920s, sung by
such as Bessie Smith (the “Empress of the Blues” 1894-1937) and Ethel Waters
female vocalists with small group
were outstanding blues singers. In 1929, the Depression almost killed the record backing.
industry, and did manage to finish off the classic blues era.
It wasn’t until 1925 that the first country blues singers began to record. It was
that year that Blind Lemon Jefferson recorded “Black Snake Moan” in Chicago,
after having worked his way north through the Mississippi Delta from his native
Texas. Another Texan, Huddie Ledbetter, better known as Leadbelly, surfaced
in the 1940s New York City folk scene with Woody Guthrie and Pete Seeger
after several troublesome years in and out of prison. But the most spine-tingling
blues performances came from the haunting vocals and bottleneck guitars of the
Delta bluesmen, such as Charley Patton, Willie Brown, Son House, and Robert
Johnson (1911-1938). Although Johnson only recorded 29 sides during his life,
his songs are among the most influential in American history, including “Love
in Vain,” “Cross Road Blues,” “Sweet Home Chicago,” and “I Believe I’ll Dust
My Broom.” Johnson’s singing and guitar playing on these recordings is riveting
even today. Unfortunately, his mythic life ended before he achieved any real
national attention when a jealous husband poisoned him at a juke joint outside
of Greenwood, Mississippi in 1938.
Chapter 1: The Roots of Rock and Roll from The History of Rock & Roll
by Thomas Larson | 5th Edition | 9781465278623
Property of Kendall Hunt Publishing
14 CHAPTER 1 The Roots of Rock and Roll
MUSIC CUT 1
“CROSS ROAD BLUES” (ROBERT JOHNSON)—
ROBERT JOHNSON
Personnel: Robert Johnson: guitar, vocals. Recorded on November 27, 1936 in
the Gunter Hotel, San Antonio, TX; produced by Don Law and Art Satherley.
When Robert Johnson recorded “Cross Road Blues” in a makeshift studio at the Gunter Hotel in
San Antonio, he had already recorded 11 of the 16 songs that would come from the three sessions
held during the week of November 22, 1936, including the classics “Sweet Home Chicago” and
“Terraplane Blues.” These sessions, along with a second round of sessions held on June 19 and 20,
1937 (which produced 13 more songs), produced what are arguably the most defining and influential
blues recordings in history. With his haunting vocals and use of a bottleneck slide on the guitar,
Johnson helps define the sound of Delta blues. The influence of Johnson’s recording of “Cross Road
Blues” can be found in the recordings of other artists who have covered it, which includes Cream,
the Doors and Van Halen.
An improvisational art form of individual expression, jazz developed as a par-
allel universe alongside the blues throughout the first half of the 20th century.
Originally evolving as an ensemble form in New Orleans and other Southern
locales around the turn of the century, like the blues it worked its way north to
Chicago around 1920. It was in the 1920s that its first true innovator, trumpeter
Louis Armstrong, revolutionized jazz by turning it into a soloist’s art form simply
KEY TERMS on the strength and drama of his virtuoso improvisations. The 65 sides that he
Jazz The music of recorded for Okeh as the leader of the Hot Five and Hot Seven between 1925
individual expression and 1928 are among the most important artifacts of American music. By the
whose main characteristics are
1930s, the center of the jazz world had moved to New York, where composers
improvisation and swing rhythm.
and arrangers such as Fletcher Henderson and Duke Ellington helped develop
the jazz big band that was to become the standard ensemble of the Swing Era.
At the same time, bandleaders in Kansas City like Count Basie were developing
an exciting riff-based boogie style that would further invigorate swing music
with the blues.
DELTA BLUESMEN nnC harley Patton
nnW illie Brown
nnS on House
nnR obert Johnson
Chapter 1: The Roots of Rock and Roll from The History of Rock & Roll
by Thomas Larson | 5th Edition | 9781465278623
Property of Kendall Hunt Publishing
CHAPTER 1 The Roots of Rock and Roll 15
nn Alto saxophonist Charlie Parker BEBOP’S
nnTrumpeter Dizzy Gillespie
nnP ianist Thelonious Monk
During the Swing Era, jazz became America’s pop music, and music indus-
try manipulation caused creative innovation and musical integrity to suffer. But
jazz began to reinvent itself around 1940 in the late-night jam sessions at tiny
nightclubs in Harlem such as Minton’s Playhouse. Modern jazz, or bebop, was
created by a small group of young musical revolutionaries in search of more
stimulating musical expression. Bebop’s architects were some of the most gifted
musical talents America has ever produced, including alto saxophonist Charlie
Parker, trumpeter Dizzy Gillespie and pianist Thelonious Monk. Although
bebop infused a fresh new vitality into jazz, it also made it impossible for most
people to dance or even listen to. In the post-bebop era, jazz musicians began to
experiment with different stylistic approaches, including cool jazz, hard bop, and
free jazz. In 1969 trumpeter Miles Davis, who had often been at the forefront
of innovation throughout his music career, fused rock and jazz together with his
seminal album Bitches Brew. Jazz continues to incorporate influences from rock
and its offshoots to this day.
Black Gospel
Black Gospel emerged as a style in the early 1930s from the traditional spiri-
TRIVIA NOTE
tuals that had been a part of black religious culture since the days of slavery. The
The man most
man most responsible for commercializing gospel music was Thomas Dorsey responsible for
(1899-1993), who is often called the “Father of Gospel Music.” Ironically, commercializing gospel music was
Thomas Dorsey, who is often called
before turning his attention to religious music, Dorsey was known as “Georgia
the “Father of Gospel Music.”
Tom,” the piano-playing half (along with guitarist Tampa Red) of the Hokum
Brothers. Their hit recording “It’s Tight Like That” from 1928 contained lewd,
off-color, humorous lyrics that presaged similar songs by Louis Jordan, Little
Richard, and Chuck Berry. In the 1930s Dorsey started writing songs of good
news and salvation with blues-influenced melodies and rhythms that eventually
became popular at church services in the black community. Among his many
gospel standards are “Take My Hand, Precious Lord,” written in 1932. Later gos-
pel stars include Sister Rosetta Tharpe and Mahalia Jackson.
Black gospel’s influence on American popular music is immense. The
melismatic singing of gospel can be heard throughout the entire history of rock
music. Gospel backup bands often used the Hammond B3 organ, which became
Black Gospel Highly
one of the most popular instruments in rock in the 1960s and 1970s. Typically per-
emotional evangel-
forming in church accompanied by large choirs, the male gospel quartets that started ical vocal music that emerged from
to become popular in the 1930s were ancestors to doo-wop groups in the 1950s. spirituals and was highly influential
to Rhythm and Blues.
Many of the early crossover R&B stars of the 1950s had gospel roots, includ-
Melisma The singing embel-
ing Little Richard and Sam Cooke, whose career took off when he joined the
lishment of a single syllable into
venerable gospel group the Soul Stirrers. Gospel is also one of the foundational several notes.
Chapter 1: The Roots of Rock and Roll from The History of Rock & Roll
by Thomas Larson | 5th Edition | 9781465278623
Property of Kendall Hunt Publishing
16 CHAPTER 1 The Roots of Rock and Roll
blocks of soul music, and its influence can be heard in the voice of the first soul
singer, Ray Charles, and in every 1960s soul singer from James Brown to Otis
Redding and Aretha Franklin.
Rhythm and Blues
KEY TERMS In the 1940s, blues musicians in Chicago began amplifying themselves in order
Rhythm and Blues to be heard over the din of the crowded clubs in the city’s South Side. Once the
An evolution of the blues went electric, it was a natural progression to speed it up, put in a heavier
blues that was more dance and
beat and make it more danceable. Although the term Rhythm and Blues wasn’t
commercially oriented. R&B bands
often included electric instruments coined until 1949 (by Jerry Wexler of Billboard magazine), the style was developed
such as guitars, bass guitars and in the 1940s out of jazz and blues roots. As the Swing Era came to an end in 1946,
organs, vocalists and a horn
Rhythm and Blues, with its boogie-woogie bass lines and honking tenor sax
section, often with a honking tenor
solos, increasingly replaced jazz as the music America wanted to dance to. Jazz
saxophone soloist.
veteran Lionel Hampton had one of the first R&B hits in 1942 with “Flying
Home,” and the biggest R&B hit of 1946, “Hey! Ba-Ba-Re-Bop.” Omaha native
Wynonie Harris had the #1 R&B hit of 1947 with “Good Rocking Tonight,”
a song that Elvis Presley would later cover. Joe Turner’s 1954 hit recording of
“Shake, Rattle and Roll” was also covered by Presley and Bill Haley.
R&B styles ranged from the raunchy to the polished. On one end of the
TRIVIA NOTE
spectrum were the down-and-dirty bar bands that emerged from the urban blues
As the Swing Era of Chicago’s South Side. The most prominent Chicago R&B performers were
came to an end in 1946,
Muddy Waters, harmonica players Little Walter and Sonny Boy Williamson, gui-
Rhythm and Blues replaced jazz
tarists Elmore James and John Lee Hooker, bassist and composer Willie Dixon,
as the music America wanted to
dance to. and singer Chester Burnett, better known as Howlin’ Wolf. These performers
all recorded at Chess Records, where they were closely linked to the soon-
to-emerge rock-and-roll styles of Bo Diddley and Chuck Berry. They were
also highly inspirational to a number of rock bands in the 1960s, including the
Rolling Stones and Cream. (One of Waters’ more influential records was 1950’s
“Rolling Stone,” which provided the English band with their name.)
Jump bands, which usually included a small horn section along with the
rhythm section and vocalist, played a smoother, more jazz-influenced type of
R&B. Popular jump bands of this era included those of Johnny Otis, Louis Prima,
and Louis Jordan (1908-1975). As leader of the Tympany Five, Jordan scored
an unbelievable 18 #1 and 54 Top 10 records on the R&B charts in the 1940s. He
still holds the record for the total number of weeks at #1 on the R&B charts—113
(Stevie Wonder is second with 70). Jordan sang songs that often contained street-
smart jive and humor, such as “Open the Door, Richard” and “Saturday Night
Fish Fry.” His biggest hits included “Choo Choo Ch’Boogie,” “Caldonia,” and
“Ain’t Nobody Here But Us Chickens.” Jordan also made innovative short mov-
ies of the Tympany Five in performance that were shown between feature films
at theaters—predecessors to the contemporary music video.
Rhythm and Blues would become one of the most prevailing influences
in popular music in the last half of the 20th century. In the mid-1950s its most
commercially successful practitioners would play important roles in shaping the
sound of early rock and roll. The lives and music of these men, Bo Diddley,
Chapter 1: The Roots of Rock and Roll from The History of Rock & Roll
by Thomas Larson | 5th Edition | 9781465278623
Property of Kendall Hunt Publishing
CHAPTER 1 The Roots of Rock and Roll 17
MUSIC CUT 2
“CHOO CHOO CH’ BOOGIE” (VAUGHN HORTON/DENVER DARLING/
MILT GABLER)—LOUIS JORDAN AND HIS TYMPANY FIVE
Personnel: Louis Jordan: alto sax, vocals; Aaron Izenhall: trumpet; Josh Jackson:
tenor sax; Bill Davis: piano; Carl Hogan: guitar; Po Simpkins: bass; Eddie Byrd:
drums. Recorded January 23, 1946 in New York City; produced by Milt Gabler.
Released 1946 on Decca; 18 weeks on the charts, peaking at #1 R&B, #4 pop.
“Choo Choo Ch’ Boogie” is a great example of the kind of R&B that made Louis Jordan the most
popular black recording artist in the 1940s. Jordan’s group the Tympany Five, a so-called jump band,
played a smooth, jazz-influenced type of R&B that prominently featured riffing horns and a driving
rhythm section. In addition to being a fine vocalist who could deliver his often-humorous lyrics
with a clear, smooth enunciation, Jordan was also a first rate alto saxophonist who had worked in the
legendary Chick Webb Orchestra at the Savoy Ballroom in Harlem before going out on his own.
Chuck Berry, Little Richard, Fats Domino and others, will be discussed in the
next chapter.
nnM uddy Waters nnJohn Lee Hooker PROMINENT
nnL ittle Walter nnWillie Dixon
CHICAGO R&B
nnS onny Boy Williamson nnHowlin’ Wolf
nnE lmore James
In terms of record sales, doo-wop was the most popular black music style in the
1950s. Its origins go back as far as the 1930s and the popularity of male gospel
quartets and commercial vocal groups such as the Mills Brothers and the Ink
Spots. The Mills Brothers (who were in fact four brothers from Ohio) prided
themselves in creating a tightly woven cross between jazz and barbershop vocal
harmonies with only guitar accompaniment. The Ink Spots were also influential
to doo-wop, featuring lead vocalist Bill Kenny singing in a melismatic, gospel- KEY TERMS
inspired high tenor voice that became a staple of doo-wop. Both groups were Doo-wop The
immensely popular throughout the 1930s and 1940s. cappella group
vocal style that incorporates high
THE EARLIEST DOO-WOP GROUPS falsetto vocal leads, scat singing,
rhythmic vocal backings, and
During the late 1940s and early 1950s, it became fashionable for amateur teen- sometimes lead vocals or spoken
age vocal groups to perform a cappella on street corners and on the stoops verse by the bass singer.
of apartment buildings, especially in New York. This was usually just for fun,
although the possibility of being discovered by a talent scout was never far from
anyone’s thoughts. The first of these groups to hit it big was the Ravens with
their 1947 hits “Write Me a Letter” and “Old Man River.” The latter record,
Chapter 1: The Roots of Rock and Roll from The History of Rock & Roll
by Thomas Larson | 5th Edition | 9781465278623
Property of Kendall Hunt Publishing
18 CHAPTER 1 The Roots of Rock and Roll
which sold two million copies, was unusual in that bass singer Warren Suttles
sang the vocal lead. This technique was to become one of the signature charac-
teristics of the doo-wop genre. The Ravens also featured choreography in their
shows—another first that was to become a staple of later soul acts such as the
Temptations and the Supremes.
Other groups started to copy these innovations. The Orioles (who, like the
baseball team, were from Baltimore) first pop hit was “It’s Too Soon to Know,”
which hit the Top 20 in 1948. The song’s huge crossover appeal was unprec-
edented for a race record and helped the group become regulars on the R&B
charts over the next few years. Their biggest success came in 1953 with “Crying
in the Chapel,” which climbed to #11. With the success of the Orioles and
TRIVIA NOTE the Ravens, other “bird” groups appeared, including the Penguins, Flamingos,
In terms of record and Swallows. Later “car” names became popular, with the Cadillacs, T-Birds,
sales, doo-wop was the Fleetwoods, and Imperials, to name just a few.
most popular black music style in
Another doo-wop group that achieved notoriety of sorts was Hank Ballard
and the Midnighters. In 1954 they had a series of “Annie” records (“Work with
Me Annie,” “Annie Had a Baby,” and “Annie’s Aunt Fanny”) that sold over a
million copies each despite being widely banned from radio play. Each song
contained sexually suggestive lyrics—the “work” in the first hit was a thinly
disguised metaphor for sex—that were as funny as they were risqué. Ballard also
wrote “The Twist” in 1958, which became a #1 hit for Chubby Checker in 1960
and spawned the dance craze of the same name. In the context of the “Annie”
records, one should reconsider what Ballard was writing about in the first line
of “The Twist”: “Well come on baby, let’s do the twist.” Perhaps it wasn’t dancing
he was singing about.
A PARTIAL LIST Bird Groups: Car Groups:
Ravens Cadillacs
Orioles T-Birds
GROUPS FROM Penguins Imperials
Flamingos Fleetwoods
Swallows Corvairs
Bluebirds Galaxies
Crows El Dorados
Robins Impalas
THE INDUSTRY MOVES IN
Although doo-wop originated as an a cappella style, recordings were most often
made using instrumental accompaniment, as record labels tried to maximize the
commercial appeal of the records and make them more danceable. Many labels
also took advantage of the street singers, who most often had no business skills
and were just happy to get a record contract. The classic example of this type of
exploitation is the story of Frankie Lymon and the Teenagers, who rose to
fame in 1956 with “Why Do Fools Fall in Love” (#6) when Lymon was only 13
years old. Producer George Goldner paid Lymon a stipend of $25 a week with
Chapter 1: The Roots of Rock and Roll from The History of Rock & Roll
by Thomas Larson | 5th Edition | 9781465278623
Property of Kendall Hunt Publishing
CHAPTER 1 The Roots of Rock and Roll 19
MUSIC CUT 3
“WHY DO FOOLS FALL IN LOVE” (FRANKIE LYMON/MORRIS LEVY)—
FRANKIE LYMON AND THE TEENAGERS
Personnel: Frankie Lymon, Jimmy Merchant, Sherman Garnes, Herman
Santiago, Joe Negroni: vocals; Jimmy Wright: tenor sax; Jimmy Shirley:
guitar; Al Hall: bass; Gene Brooks: drums. Recorded 1955 at Bell Sound Studios,
New York, NY; produced by George Goldner. Released January 1956 on Gee;
21 weeks on the charts, peaking at #6.
The Teenagers, made up of five school buddies from New York, were the quintessential “unknowns
discovered singing on the street corner” doo-wop group. After another singer named Richard
Barrett discovered them in 1955, the group signed with George Goldner’s Gee records. At their
first recording session, they performed “Why Do Fools Fall in Love,” a song that Teenagers Herman
Santiago and Jimmy Merchant co-wrote. However, Santiago, who was supposed to sing lead, had a
cold, and the job was handed to Lymon. Subsequently he and producer Goldman were given writing
credits for the song (this was later overturned by a federal judge in the early 1990s). The song has
been a Hot 100 hit four times, most recently in 1981 with Diana Ross’s version.
the rest of his earnings going into a “trust fund.” When Lymon’s voice changed
a few years later and his career went in decline, he discovered that there was in
fact no trust fund. He turned to heroin and died from an overdose at 26. Many
other doo-wop groups were “one hit wonders,” as bad business deals, compet-
ing cover versions, and instability of the small independent labels took their toll.
One of the best examples of the one hit wonder was the Chords, whose only hit
“Sh-Boom” in 1953 was quickly buried by the Crewcuts’ cover.
One fledgling record company, Atlantic Records, had unusual success with
doo-wop. Although its primary focus was on jazz when it was founded in 1947,
Atlantic signed Clyde McPhatter of the Dominos in 1953 and built a new group,
the Drifters, around him. They were an instant smash, with five hits that went to
#1 or #2 on the R&B charts within the next two years. McPhatter was drafted
into the military in 1955, and was replaced by a succession of lead singers until
Ben E. King took over in 1958. At around the same time, the young songwriting
duo of Jerry Leiber and Mike Stoller were assigned to the group, and their first
production, “There Goes My Baby” went to #2 pop and stayed on the charts
for fourteen weeks. Between 1957 and 1959, Leiber and Stoller also wrote five
Top 10 hits for another doo-wop group, the Coasters.
THE WHITE ROOTS OF ROCK AND ROLL
Traditional Rural Music
Traditional rural music in America evolved primarily from the folk music
brought to the New World by British immigrants. The Appalachian region of
Hillbilly music The
Tennessee, Kentucky, Virginia, and West Virginia were particularly fertile areas
traditional old time
for the survival of this music tradition, as the rural and isolated mountainous music of the rural South and
settings hampered contact with the changing outside world. By the early 20th Appalachian regions, with origins
in English folk music. Hillbilly
century, city dwellers began to mockingly call the poor white inhabitants of this
music is the foundation of modern
region “hillbillies,” and the simple folk music they played hillbilly music. country music.
Chapter 1: The Roots of Rock and Roll from The History of Rock & Roll
by Thomas Larson | 5th Edition | 9781465278623
Property of Kendall Hunt Publishing
20 CHAPTER 1 The Roots of Rock and Roll
The British folk tradition included ballads, which typically tell a story,
some of them epic tales; lyric songs, which are often songs of love; and work
songs. Unlike African work songs, British work songs often came in the form of
sea chanteys, railroad songs, and lumber songs. At first, folk music in America was
simply sung verbatim by the new colonists as it had been in England; over time
songs often underwent subtle changes as their original meanings and purposes
were forgotten and singers adapted them to their new environment. New songs
in the same tradition were also written. A good example of a traditional English
ballad that survived in America is “Barbara Allen,” a timeless song about young
lovers and death believed to be from the 17th century. Although it has evolved
over the years, it is still a folk standard that has been performed by everyone
from Joan Baez to the Everly Brothers to Bob Dylan. On the other hand, “Sweet
Betsy from Pike,” written around 1870 using a traditional English melody, is a
uniquely American song about the hard journey West, with lyrics that invoke the
imagery of the Platte River, Salt Lake City, and California.
Unlike blues and country musicians who eventually embraced the use of
electric instruments, rural and folk musicians continued to use the traditional
acoustic instruments from the past, such as the fiddle, acoustic guitar, and banjo.
After 1900 other acoustic instruments such as the mandolin, string bass, auto-
harp, and Hawaiian steel guitar were also often included. To this day, many folk
musicians typically use only these traditional instruments in their performances.
THE FIRST COUNTRY RECORDINGS
Traditional rural music was first recorded in 1923 when Okeh Records recorded
Atlanta favorite Fiddlin’ John Carson at a local radio station. The records sold
surprisingly well throughout the region, much to the amazement of company
officials. Sensing a business opportunity, Ralph Peer (1892-1960) of Victor
Records went on a talent hunt for other rural musicians in August of 1927.
British folk tradition
The traditional folk Setting up his primitive mobile recording equipment in a warehouse in Bristol,
music, including ballads, lyric Tennessee, and offering $50 per song to anyone who would audition, Peer struck
songs and work songs, of the
gold. Among the many that came down from the hills to record at the Bristol
British Isles. British immigrants
Sessions, as they became known, were both the Carter Family and Jimmie
brought these songs to the
New World. Rodgers, who would become the first commercially successful and important
Bristol Sessions The first performers of country music, as it was starting to be labeled by the late 1920s.
important country music The Carter Family, led by A. P. Carter, his wife Sara, and their sister-in-
recordings made in Bristol,
law Maybelle, had learned hundreds of traditional songs and performed them
Tennessee in 1927 by Ralph
Peer. Among the artists that Peer putting emphasis on their strong vocals and a revolutionary flat picking guitar
recorded were Jimmie Rodgers style that is still commonly used by folk guitarists. Jimmie Rodgers, known
and the Carter Family.
alternately as the “Father of Country Music,” “America’s Blue Yodeler,” and the
“Singing Brakeman,” was indeed a railroad worker until his poor health forced
him to quit and concentrate on music. Between 1927 and 1933 when he died
from tuberculosis, Rodgers (1897-1933) recorded over 100 songs, sold millions
of records, and became the first nationally known country star. His song topics
and vocal style (which included blues inflections and his signature yodeling) set
the mold for later stars such as Ernest Tubb and Hank Williams. As one of the
three original inductees into the Country Music Hall of Fame, Rodgers’s plaque
identifies him as “the man who started it all.”
Chapter 1: The Roots of Rock and Roll from The History of Rock & Roll
by Thomas Larson | 5th Edition | 9781465278623
Property of Kendall Hunt Publishing
CHAPTER 1 The Roots of Rock and Roll 21
MUSIC CUT 4
“BLUE YODEL #1 (T FOR TEXAS)” (JIMMIE RODGERS)—
JIMMIE RODGERS
Personnel: Jimmie Rodgers: guitar, vocals. Recorded on November 30, 1927
at RCA Victor Studio 1, Camden, NJ; produced by Ralph Peer. Released
February 3, 1928.
“Blue Yodel #1 (T for Texas)” was recorded in the RCA Victor Studio 1, the former Trinity Baptist
Church in Camden, New Jersey. It was Rodgers’s second session for the label and its producer
Ralph Peer (the first being the famous August 4, 1927 session in Bristol, Tennessee), and the one
that made him a star. Rodgers originally called his song “T for Texas,” but Peer, impressed by
the “oh-de-lay” yodels at the end of each verse, renamed it “Blue Yodel.” It became a smash that
ended up selling approximately one million copies, and instantly made Rodgers a household
name. Rodgers became known as “America’s Blue Yodeler,” and went on to record ten more “Blue
Yodels.” His use of both blue-infused melodies and yodels made him a major influence to both the
black and white vocalists of his day.
NASHVILLE AND THE GRAND OLE OPRY
Radio played an important role in popularizing country music. In 1923, the
first “barn dance” program was broadcast on station WBAP in Dallas, featur-
ing live performances by country artists. Other shows soon followed: in 1924,
TRIVIA NOTE
Chicago’s WLS premiered its National Barn Dance program, and on November
28, 1925, the WSM Barn Dance began broadcasting in Nashville. In 1927, WSM Today the Grand
Ole Opry is the longest
(which still resides at 650 Hz on the dial) changed the name of the program
continuously running radio
to the Grand Ole Opry and with the station’s clear channel designation, the
program in the United States.
Opry became the most widely heard and influential radio show of its kind.
Other “barn dance” programs included the Louisiana Hayride on KWKH in
Shreveport, Louisiana, the Midwestern Hayride on WLW in Cincinnati, and the
Big D Jamboree on KRLD in Dallas.
Today, the Grand Ole Opry is the longest continuously running radio pro-
gram in the United States. It has influenced the course of country music by
putting an emphasis on programming pop-oriented and crooning country sing-
ers (and forbidding drums for many years). Careers were often made by a suc-
cessful debut there. Because the Opry was a live broadcast, performers had to
maintain a presence in Nashville at least one day each week, and throughout Grand Ole
Opry The radio
the 1940s and 1950s, many moved there permanently. Songwriters, publishers,
program that began broadcasting
recording studios, and all the major record labels soon followed, and by the early
in 1925 from WSM in Nashville
1950s, Nashville became the capital of the country music industry—in large part that essentially made that city
because of the Grand Ole Opry. the center of the country music
Cowboy songs Traditional
Cowboy Music, Western Swing, and Bluegrass country and hillbilly songs used
in Hollywood films that were
Around the same time that radio was starting to make country music more acces- orchestrated to create a more
commercial pop sound.
sible, Hollywood filmmakers were popularizing cowboy songs in Westerns, and
stars such as Gene Autry (“The Singing Cowboy”) and Roy Rogers rose to
fame. Cowboy songs were dressed up and orchestrated to give them a smoother
and more commercial sound; the singing cowboys themselves were also dressed
up in hats, boots, and ties to elevate them from the older and undesirable hillbilly
Chapter 1: The Roots of Rock and Roll from The History of Rock & Roll
by Thomas Larson | 5th Edition | 9781465278623
Property of Kendall Hunt Publishing
22 CHAPTER 1 The Roots of Rock and Roll
image. Cowboy songs helped pave the way for other commercialized offshoots
of country to emerge that would reinvent the genre. One of these was Western
swing, which became popular during the Swing Era and whose biggest star
was Texas fiddler Bob Wills. Wills began broadcasting on station KVOO in Tulsa,
Oklahoma in 1934 with his band the Texas Playboys, which combined traditional
country instruments with those found in a swing big band: trumpets, saxophones,
KEY TERMS and drums. Despite their tendencies toward jazz, the Playboys wore the traditional
Western swing A country attire of cowboy hats, boots, and string ties. Wills had his biggest hit in
form of country music 1940 with “New San Antonio Rose,” which went to #11 on the charts.
that incorporates jazz swing
Another stylistic development was bluegrass, which was invented and
rhythm and instruments associated
with a jazz swing band. named by mandolin player Bill Monroe. With his band the Blue Grass Boys,
Bluegrass A fast paced, acoustic which he formed in 1938, Monroe developed a unique genre that relied on
music that incorporated virtuoso faster tempos and jazz-like virtuoso solos that were spread evenly among man-
improvised solos similar to those
dolin, fiddle, and guitar. When guitarist and vocalist Lester Flatt and banjo wiz-
found in jazz.
ard Earl Scruggs joined the band in 1944, the Blue Grass Boys were in their
Honky-tonk A country-oriented
prime. Scruggs did nothing less than reinvent banjo playing with his amazing fast
predecessor to rock and roll that
used a rhythm section, electric picking style. Flatt and Scruggs left in 1948 (due to Monroe’s stubbornness and
guitar, and electric pedal steel difficult personality) and started their own band, which in time became more
guitar to create a louder and
popular than Monroe’s.
hard driving sound. Honky tonk
lyrics often dealt with drinking,
cheating, etc. Southern Gospel
Southern Gospel A Christian-
based genre of music that first Southern, or “white” gospel had a parallel course of development to that of
became popularized in the
Black Gospel. Its beginnings can be traced back to the earliest white settlers from
Southern United States in the
early 20th century by male vocal Britain, who along with folk songs brought their hymns. Throughout the 19th
quartets singing with piano or century a style of singing known as Sacred Harp or shape note music became
small group accompaniment.
popular, especially in the South, which used a simple notation system that even
illiterates could read. By the late 1800s a rebirth of hymn writing known as
Gospel led to the creation of many hymns that are still sung today, including
“Jesus Loves Me” and “Blessed Assurance.” As hymn publishers began to flourish
in the 20th century, it became fashionable for them to use traveling vocal groups
known as Southern Gospel Quartets as sales representatives for songbooks. The
man who is today known as the Father of the Southern Gospel music industry
was James D. Vaughan, who started a publishing company in 1900, a music school
in 1911, and one of the first radio stations in the South in 1922. In 1910 Vaughan
became the first publisher to use a vocal quartet to sell songbooks.
As other publishers picked up the idea of using vocal quartets to sell books,
the Southern Gospel industry took off. In addition to the early Vaughan groups,
other popular Southern Gospel groups in the early to mid 1900s included the
Blackwood Brothers, Oak Ridge Quartet, the Statesmen, the Statler Brothers,
the Louvin Brothers, and the Gaither Vocal Band. The records from these groups
were important influences on the earliest white rock and rollers, including Elvis
Presley, Jerry Lee Lewis, Johnny Cash, and Carl Perkins. Southern Gospel was
such an important part of Presley’s musical background that he recorded three
gospel albums during his lifetime, and sang “Peace in the Valley” – a song written
by Thomas Dorsey and a standard among Southern Gospel groups - with the
white gospel group the Jordanaires on The Ed Sullivan Show in 1957.
Chapter 1: The Roots of Rock and Roll from The History of Rock & Roll
by Thomas Larson | 5th Edition | 9781465278623
Property of Kendall Hunt Publishing
CHAPTER 1 The Roots of Rock and Roll 23
Honky-tonk grew out of the bars and roadhouses (called “honky-tonks”) of
Texas and the South, where the patrons were rough and rowdy and hard drink-
ers. The music is characterized by songs of drinkin’ and cheatin’, loves gained
and lost. To be heard above the din of the crowded saloons, the honky-tonkers
developed a louder, driving sound by adding drums, electric guitar, and electric
pedal steel guitar that modernized country music and inched it closer in sound
to the first rock-and-roll style, rockabilly. The first honky-tonk artist was Ernest
Tubb, who with his Texas Troubadours had been touring constantly and per-
forming on radio since the early 1930s, achieving national celebrity in the 1940s
with movie roles and Opry appearances. Another honky-tonk artist, Texas-born
William “Lefty” Frizzell, is widely credited with creating a smoother singing
style that became the blueprint for modern country singers. He was a regular on
the country charts throughout the 1950s and early 1960s.
MUSIC CUT 5
“YOUR CHEATIN’ HEART” (HANK WILLIAMS/FRED ROSE)—
HANK WILLIAMS
Personnel: Hank Williams: guitar, vocal; other musicians unidentified. Recorded
September 23, 1952 at Castle Studios, Nashville, TN; produced by Fred Rose.
Released January 1953 on MGM; a #1 hit on the country charts.
“Your Cheatin’ Heart,” the song that is often called the song that defines country music—and
honky tonk—was recorded at Hank Williams’s last recording session. According to legend,
Williams, who had just separated from his first wife Audrey, wrote the song while driving around
with the woman who would become his second wife, Billie Jean Williams. After Billie Jean wrote
down the lyrics, Hank took them to Nashville songwriter Fred Rose, who edited them and pro-
duced the final version of the song. After recording the song, Williams told a friend, “It’s the best
heart song I ever wrote.”
Although his recording career lasted only six years, the man who most
personified honky tonk was undoubtedly Hank Williams (1923-1953), the
“Hillbilly Shakespeare.” Williams was a master poet with a knack for catchy
melodies who wrote some of the most enduring tunes in country music history,
including “Hey Good Lookin’,” “Jambalaya,” “Cold, Cold Heart,” and “Your
Cheatin’ Heart.” Williams became so popular in the late 1940s and early 1950s
that he had 11 records that sold a million copies or more, and his concerts
often resembled the near riots that Elvis Presley would incite a few years later.
Unfortunately, his growing drinking problem paralleled that of his rising fame,
and his life began to fall apart. He died of alcohol intoxication in the back seat
of a car on the way to a gig on January 1, 1953. The last single released in his
lifetime was his prophetic composition “I’ll Never Get Out of This World Alive.”
Chapter 1: The Roots of Rock and Roll from The History of Rock & Roll
by Thomas Larson | 5th Edition | 9781465278623
Property of Kendall Hunt Publishing
Chapter 1: The Roots of Rock and Roll from The History of Rock & Roll
by Thomas Larson | 5th Edition | 9781465278623
Property of Kendall Hunt Publishing
Describe Frank Sinatra’s relationship to rock and roll, both his reaction to it and his influence on it.
Describe how technology changed the way music was recorded and packaged in the years leading up
What were some differences between the major and independent labels, both in how they operated
and what kind of music they specialized in?
What role did radio play in the explosion of rock and roll, and who were the important personalities?
Describe how the blues evolved from its beginning until the 1940s.

Chapter 1: The Roots of Rock and Roll from The History of Rock & Roll
by Thomas Larson | 5th Edition | 9781465278623
Property of Kendall Hunt Publishing
26 CHAPTER 1 The Roots of Rock and Roll
Describe the music that influenced doo-wop and how doo-wop in turn influenced rock and roll.
Describe how music from the British folk tradition changed after it was brought to America.
Describe how Nashville became such an important music center.
What were the musical influences on Western swing and how did they manifest themselves?
Why is honky tonk music so important to early rock and roll?